# MUFI Runic sub-panel meeting 

10.30—11.30 CET, 1 August 2023

- Present: Elisabeth Magin (sub-panel co-chair), Marcus Smith (sub-panel co-chair), Tarrin Wills (MUFI chair)
- Secretary: Tarrin Wills
- Minutes edited by Marcus Smith

## Name for project

- We decided on "Runicode".
- **Task:** Set up GitHub repo for project (Marcus)

## Meeting in Autumn

- Following the workshop in Uppsala in March 2023, where it was first agreed upon to form this sub-panel, it was agreed to hold an initial sub-panel meeting in the Autumn. We agreed to hold the meeting in connection with ‘[Bug or Feature](https://github.com/Bug-or-Feature-DH)’ in Oslo, c. 10:00–18:00 Monday 6 November.
- To invite: Alessia, Alessandro, Marco, Christianne, MUFI board, …?
- Focused on developing a data model and approach for runic encoding.
- To be held as a hybrid conference (to allow remote participation)
- On the agenda:
	- to develop objectives of the group
	- to agree upon a scope and remit
	- to propose/plan future activities
- **Task:** Draft agenda, send out invitations (Elisabeth, Marcus)
